Hey, it's Michael. This week, The Daily
is revisiting some of our favorite
episodes this year, listening back and
hearing what's happened in the time
since they first ran.
Today, we return to our conversation
with Thomas Sip, the lawyer who quit his
job at a prestigious corporate law firm
after his bosses gave in to legally
dubious demands from President Trump.
And we hear how SIP views that moment.
Now, eight months later, it's Monday,
December 29th.
Thomas, welcome to the Daily.
>> Thanks for having me.
>> I'm getting the small sense that this is
a nerve-wracking experience for you even
before it started. I'm just seeing it on
your face.
>> Yeah, it definitely is.
I want to start by asking you to explain
Thomas how it is that you came to be a
lawyer in the first place and ended up
at this very prestigious firm where you
worked until just a few days ago
Scatteren Ararps. What's that story?
>> So going all the way to the start, I was
born in Japan to an American father and
a Japanese mother.
>> And my family moved to the United States
when I was 10. My parents separated
shortly after. And so, you know, I was
learning English in middle school and
also learning about what it means to be
an American. [clears throat] Suddenly
becoming this sort of racial minority
because I'm mixed race and coming to
understand the social fabric that's kind
of unique to the United States. Um,
especially compared to a relatively
homogeneous country like Japan,
>> right?
and you know growing up with my my
single mom who doesn't speak you know
fluent English and getting all those
sort of experiences I think started to
put me on the path that I'm on now.
>> Can you just explain that?
>> Yeah. I mean there were difficult days
for sure. you know, whether it's
not being able to make friends, being
made fun of for my accent and stuff like
that that really I think started to form
uh like that sense of injustice that I
think fuels me sometimes, right? But at
the same time, I moved to the United
States, you know, in 2008 and during the
election and there's all this
conversation in America about
hopefulness and about, you know, this
being a country where there's a place
for for anyone,
>> right? And so I was also absorbing that
as well.
>> Mhm.
>> In high school, I joined a debate team
to practice public speaking. And in
college, I was studying political
science at the University of Texas.
>> And I had this wonderful opportunity to
be a an intern at the United States
Senate.
>> Wow.
>> This was probably basically like a
decade after I moved to the United
States. And suddenly I'm walking through
the halls of Congress with my little,
you know, yellow Senate intern badge and
running into senators and congressmen
getting to sit in on important hearings.
And it was during that time that I
really decided I want to be a part of
this project here in the United States.
>> And when you say this project,
>> what do you mean?
>> It's, you know, a march towards justice,
the betterment of everyone. I think
there are these like core principles
that are unique to the United States in
many ways.
>> I'm getting from you a real sense of
idealism and a real pure admiration for
what the United States represents. Yeah,
I'm not blind to the errors in the past
and I I know that the United States has
not been and still is not a perfect
country, but I really still believe
that, you know, when the United States
is doing the right things, the whole
world is a better place because of it.
>> So, talk about how this all translates
into your decision to become a lawyer,
to enter this industry. Well, so a lot
of the people with the cool jobs in DC
tend to have law degrees. And so I
figured it was the, you know, the next
best step um afterward. And so I go to
law school straight out of college. All
the law firms, the big law firms, um
almost by definition pay the same scale
salary. So that the way that these law
firms distinguish themselves from each
other often times is in things like how
their proono program operates, how how
invested they are into diversity
initiatives.
>> And I chose Scatteren because it had the
prestige. And as a as a 22-year-old
trying to pay off a six-f figureure
debt, I was drawn toward a higher salary
among other things.
>> I'm just going to explain to people.
>> Yes. By Scatteren, you mean Scatteren
Arps?
>> Scatteren Arps. Yes.
>> Big big law firm has an office here. New
York has offices I think all over the
world. It's one of the firms that we
think of when we think of this concept
of big law law firms that do a huge
amount of work in corporate America.
>> Mhm. [clears throat] That's right. And
Scatteren really advertised two things.
It's proono program and its diversity
initiatives. With regard to the proono
programs, Scatteren had a rule basically
that said that you can count an
unlimited number of your proono hours
towards your billable hours requirement.
And it was a big deal that Scatteren
does that because not many other firms
do.
>> So when did you start to understand that
Scatteren had entered the president's
crosshairs? So on March 17th when the
EEOC, which stands for the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission,
>> basically published this letter listing
20 law firms, including my own, saying
that these law firms are essentially
under investigation for their practices
um related to diversity.
>> Right. I believe the claim was that
these law firms may have practiced
discrimination through the application
of diversity, equity, and inclusion
practices.
>> Right. And these executive orders, I
think it's worth reminding listeners,
they can feel to the law firms that are
being hit with them like death sentences
because they explicitly prevent these
firms like Perkins Kuey from interacting
with the federal government. And so the
people [clears throat] work at these
firms fear that they may go out of
business.
>> Right. Yeah. And one of my friends from
the firm sends me an article that the
New York Times published basically
stating that Scatteren was in talks with
the administration to avert an executive
order. And this was after Paul Weiss,
which is essentially a pure firm, made a
deal including for $40 million proono
commitment to causes that the president
agrees with. And during that preceding
week, there had been, you know, pockets
of the law firm trying to organize some
sort of, you know, requests from a
response, nothing publicly, but at least
internally, seeking clarity and hoping
to provide at least some input into what
the attorneys who actually work there
feel about what's going on and how so
many of us believe that it's
unconstitutional,
>> the executive orders,
>> right? Like, this is not a difficult
legal question. There's no legal basis
for what the president's doing. It's
complete abuse of power. And so we want
our firm to stand up for that,
>> but we're feeling like things are moving
really fast and and we felt voiceless.
>> Mhm. So what what happens next?
>> So there's this email thread that got
around to parts of the firm. And so when
I see that,
I realize, you know, at that point
that's pretty likely that there's going
to be a deal
and that it's going to be one that the
attorneys don't like.
[music]
>> And you know, within hours, I think
we again find out from the news
that there [music] is this agreement
and then we hear from the firm. They
have done a deal.
>> Yeah. [music]
[music]
We'll be right [music] back.
I just want to summarize what is in this
deal that Scatteren reached with
President Trump. It promises to provide
$100 million in proono legal services
from Scatteren to causes that both
President Trump and the law firm both
support. It calls for hiring what are
known as Scatteren fellows. Those
fellows are at least some of them
supposed to be focused on Trump friendly
issues and some of them have to be
conservative
>> in their ideological outlook. And then
there's a part of the agreement that
vows that Scatteren will not engage in
quote unquote illegal DEI hiring
practices.
Broadly, this is the deal that every
major law firm that has come to an
agreement has reached with the
president. So what is your reaction to
this deal when you finally digest it?
Personally, I felt ashamed to work at
Scatteren and that's such a new
experience because because of how you
know prestigious the law firm is and
then suddenly in you know the blink of
an eye in just a few days even like my
whole view of the firm has been
completely tainted.
>> Can you explain what precisely is making
you feel the shame?
>> You know it's a mix of things. This is
giving the president a PR win after
[clears throat] being bullied. So, it
seems like I'm working at a firm that,
you know, isn't as high caliber as it
said it was,
>> right? But more importantly than that,
so many lawyers agree that what the
president is doing is wrong. This is a
threat to our constitutional fabric, to
our democracy, to our civil liberties.
You know, people should be able to be
represented by by their lawyers freely.
Judges should be able to make decisions
even if it goes against the president.
And to see Scatteren be complicit to aid
this attack,
I was so ashamed to work there.
>> So what did you do?
>> So I start actually just writing down
notes and really my questions. Some of
them are practical like how is this
going to be enforced? What will it
actually look like? And I started
thinking about it and finding answers
and so the questions became statements
and I realized what I had written was a
draft of resignation letter. So that's
>> not necessarily what you set out to do.
>> No.
>> Can I ask you to to read from parts of
the letter?
>> Yeah, of course.
>> [clears throat]
>> Dear colleagues and friends,
I'm writing to let you know that I'm
leaving [music] this firm.
There was a time when my employment here
was so unlikely. For much of my early
childhood, I [music] was not a good
student. I struggled to focus in class
and take anything seriously. But even
then, there was one subject I loved.
History.
I thought it was so wonderful to learn
about all that came before me, [music]
about the triumphs and tragedies, about
the moments of individual bravery and
[music] collective complacency.
I would often imagine myself faced with
the same dilemmas.
What would I do if I was there? Would I
do the right thing?
It always felt like there was no way to
know.
I believe, as I know many of you do,
that what the current presidential
administration is doing is wrong. That
we are sliding into an autocracy where
those in power are above the rule of
law.
Scatteren's agreement with the Trump
administration sent our country deeper
down this descent. [music]
And then I finish,
Scatteren is on the wrong side of
history. [music]
I could no longer stay knowing that
someday I would have to explain why I
stayed. [music]
>> What did it feel like to hit send?
I mean, listen to your
>> breathing right now. It's like you're
reliving it.
>> Yeah. Um,
>> what was it like to send that email?
If you heard my breath, it felt like
that.
Uh maybe a hundred times more though
because I knew that, you know, that was
a pivotal moment in my life. Maybe maybe
just as pivotal as coming to the United
States in the first place. I knew that I
was closing some doors and,
you know, a place like Scatteren.
I'm grateful for that experience. I
think it's only possible in a country
like the United States. and I really
really believe in it.
>> I'm sure you're aware
>> that many people who have spoken out
against President Trump and his policies
have experienced at times ferocious
blowback.
>> Mhm.
>> It can be a lifealtering event. Is that
something you're worried about now?
>> Yeah. And I was finally able to talk to
my mother after, you know, resigning and
she's in back in Japan. Hm.
>> You know, with the rest of my family.
And I told her I quit. She's like, "Do
you have another job?" And I was like,
"No, mom, you don't understand. Like,
this is like in the news." And she sort
of didn't process it at first. And then
she started to cry. And she asked me to
come back to Japan. And I said, "No,
like I can't and I won't."
>> Many of your colleagues are not leaving
their jobs. They may feel the way you
feel and have two kids they have to put
through college.
>> They might not feel the way you feel.
I'm thinking about reporting my
colleagues did inside the upper echelons
of Paul Weiss when that law firm did a
deal with Trump. And it became clear
that the majority of the people who run
the firm, lots of them, felt that the
best thing to do was to make a deal to
protect the thousands of people who work
at these firms. And that at the end of
the day, what they're giving up is small
compared to that survival. And the
bosses at all these firms that end up
capitulating to Trump say some version
of, "We are the same law firm after we
did these deals as we were before." In
fact, in a companywide email, your
former boss says just that, quote, "This
agreement does not change who we are."
What do you make of that?
>> I just don't think that's true.
These law firms are agreeing to these
deals when they know that there's no
legal basis for any threat executive
order. And by capitulating, they're
aiding, you know, this existential
threat against the profession, the
independence of the judiciary and our
democracy and everyone who depends on
it.
>> It does change who the firm is.
>> Yes. In short,
>> yes,
>> you very clearly have a lot of faith in
the US, but at this point, how confident
are you given everything you've just
been through that the version of the
United States that seems to be at the
center of everything you've done here is
now the version of the United States?
confident because of what so many
people, strangers, you know, reaching
out to me have said to me, which is that
they're also scared. Everyone is scared.
But if everyone could, you know, stand
up and speak up about this, then we can
turn this back, I think we can save it
still.
>> But are you a little bit worried that
you're making the wrong bet?
>> Well, of course I'm, you know, worried.
I guess, you know, I'm putting my career
on the line for this and I I knew that
going into this. I have student loans. I
have a single mom who, you know,
>> Andrew just publicly picked a little bit
of a fight with the president.
>> That's right.
>> I wonder if this experience made you
question going into law.
>> No, I don't I don't regret becoming a
lawyer
and going to law school. It's a
wonderful education.
You know, even my time at Scatteren, I
learned so much and it's equipping me
with skills, I think, to advocate for
what I believe in and for for others as
well.
And that's what lawyers do.
Well, Thomas, thank you for for coming
[music] in here and for telling us the
story. We really appreciate it.
>> Thank you.
after the break. How Thomas has fared
[music] since he quit his job.
[music]
>> Let's catch up. Okay. Formally.
>> Okay. You look well. You look rested.
>> The last time you saw me, I was running
on almost no sleep.
>> Well, catch me up on everything that's
happened to you. Last time we spoke, it
was just a few days after you quit your
job at Scatteren,
>> right?
>> Suddenly, you're not employed. You're
not getting any paychecks.
>> What happened next?
>> Uh, came on this podcast. [laughter]
>> I remember that part. and sounded like
people generally liked, you know, what I
said. And I got
so many heartfelt messages from people,
you know, feeling that sort of
hopefulness that I feel thinking about
these sort of democratic values, what it
means to be an American. Other people
reached out because they felt sort of
maybe a kinship, a sort of common
background, whatever it may be. There
were just some parents who were worried
about their kids and, you know,
listening with their kids and those are
some of the most touching ones. There
was one in particular that really struck
me. It was a
>> Can you describe it?
>> Yeah. It was a a father driving his kids
to school and they're listening to this
episode and he's asking kids his kids,
"What would you do
>> if you were in Thomas's position?"
>> Yeah. Exactly. And that's the sort of
thing that when I was a kid, I would
think about in history class. And I
don't know, it was a really great
feeling and it gave me a real it's like
a win in my back.
>> And what ends up happening to your job
prospects? Do you end up finding a job?
>> Long story short, I do. I'm currently
working for a federal judge.
>> And what can you tell me about that
work, how you got it, and how it may or
may not fit into the way that your last
job ended.
>> Uh, I can't tell you a lot, but I can
tell you some things.
>> Okay. The judge actually found me
through his network and mine kind of
colliding. Uh I'm his the title is I'm a
law clerk and the job is essentially
analyzing the law, explaining it, making
recommendations to the judge. So you're
basically the judge's assistant. I know
when you clerk for a judge, this is my
sense, you may not be able to discuss a
lot of the intricacies of your work, but
it strikes me that if you're working for
a federal judge,
>> you're potentially interacting with
President Trump's agenda to some degree.
and federal judges are the figures in
our legal system right now who are seen
as really the most powerful and
important potential checks on this
president
and I'm sure that hasn't escaped you
either.
I'm to be honest I'm not going to talk
about you know active cases that may or
may not be before my judge. because
there's pretty serious ethics concerns
about, you know, clerks typically don't
talk to the media,
>> right?
>> And
I want to make it clear that the judge's
job isn't to be a partisan actor. It's
to be the adjudicator of what the law
says. And as you know, my judge's clerk,
that's also my job and responsibility.
And I take that really seriously,
>> right? And
I think the true interpretation is that,
you [clears throat] know, I made this
decision on on ethics grounds. And it
was about what I thought, you know, the
law was, what the constitution demands.
And I was just hoping to explain my own
decision in a time when I think a lot of
people were facing a similar decision
and they weren't sure what it would look
like on the other side.
And I guess right now I'm speaking to
you from the other side of that
decision. Say
I was fine. I was actually more than
fine.
>> There is another side.
>> There is another side
>> to quitting a big prestigious
well-paying job at a law firm on
principal.
>> Yes. In the year 2025,
you'll end up all right. And
specifically speaking to the lawyers,
not everyone in America can safely speak
their mind right now. Mhm.
But lawyers
can obviously you may be targeted and
but the law firms that fought back and
are winning in courts are doing fine
financially. You know they're not
they're not going underwater
and
this I think existential fear was
completely overblown.
>> It was overstated
>> I think. So it was a excuse. I think it
was putting profits over an oath that
lawyers swear
>> to protect the constitution.
>> And you know, if someone like me ends up
fine, more than fine, then the executive
partners and chairpersons of these law
firms
>> who make many millions more,
>> right, would [snorts] have been
completely fine, too.
And [music]
regardless,
I think the oaths have to mean
something. [music]
>> Thank you [music] once again for your
time and your cander.
>> The the pleasure and the privilege is
all mine. I really just want to say
thank [music] you because you were a
huge part of what happened to me a few
months ago. You changed my life.
Oh, well, [music] you changed your own
life.
We just chronicled it.
[music]
Today's [music] Daily was produced by
Olivia Nat, Shannon Lynn, and Mooj
Zadei. It was edited by Patricia
Willins, Jodie [music] Becker, and
Michael Benois.
contains music by Dan Powell and Marian
Lozano and was engineered by Alyssa
[music] Moxley, Rowan Nisto, and Chris
Wood. Special thanks to Jessica Silver
Greenberg.
That's it [music] for the daily. I'm
Michael Borrow.
See you tomorrow.